(bright music)
(keyboard clacking)
All right, so let's implement insertion sort.
I've already created the project.
I'll be putting code into
academy.learnprogramming.insertionsort.
I've added the usual array and code to print the array.
And this implementation doesn't need the swap method.
We don't swap, we shift elements.
And so I have not added the swap method
because we don't need it.
Okay, so let's get going,
so we'll say for int firstUnsortedIndex
equals one
because remember, this implementation starts out
by assuming that the element at position zero
is in the sorted partition,
and so the first unsorted index will start at one.
And then we're gonna keep going
as long as the first unsorted index
is less than the length of the array.
So we're gonna examine all the elements
right up to the end of the array.
And after each iteration,
the first unsorted index will be incremented by one,
because we're growing the sorted partition
from left to right, and so the first unsorted index
is going to be increasing by one after every iteration.
Okay, so the first thing we're gonna do
is save the value of the element we're going to insert
into new element
because as you saw in the slides, when we do the shifting,
that position, the element, is going to be overwritten.
And so we need to save the value off,
so we're gonna save off intArray firstUnsortedIndex
and I'm going to declare i outside the loop
because I need it after the loop.
And now, we're going to code the loop
that does the traversal of the sorted partition
and looks for the correct position to insert new element.
So we're gonna say for i equals firstUnsortedIndex
because when we start out, the element we want to insert
is that first inserted index,
and we're going to continue to loop,
in other words, we're going to continue to look
and keep shifting items, as long as i is greater than zero
because that means we haven't hit the front of the array.
And...
And we'll keep going as long as
whatever's at intArray i minus one
is greater than newElement.
So what is this doing?
Just to go over this again,
we want to keep looking for the insertion position
as long as we haven't hit the front of the array
because if we hit the front of the array,
it means that the element we're trying to insert
is the smallest element we've seen so far
and the correct insertion position is zero.
And we wanna keep looking as long as
the element we're looking at in the sorted partition
is greater than the one we're trying to insert,
because if the element at i minus one is greater
than the element we're trying to insert,
then we still haven't found the correct insertion position.
So the moment we hit the front of the array,
or the moment we hit an element that is less than
or equal to the element we're trying to insert,
we have found the correct insertion position.
And on each iteration, we're going to decrement i
because remember we are traversing the sorted partition
and doing the comparisons from right to left,
and so we're moving down the sorted partition.
Okay, so what do want to do
if we haven't hit the front of the array
and if the element at i minus one
is greater than the element we're inserting?
Well, if that's the case,
we want to shift the element at i minus one to the right,
because we need to make room for this new element,
so what we're going to do
is we're going to assign intArray i
with intArray i minus one,
and so this is where we're doing the shifting.
We're shifting from left to right.
So for example, when we want to insert minus 15,
assume we've done the first iteration
and 20 and 35 are in the sorted partition
when we want to insert minus 15,
the first unsorted index will be two,
so i will be two, so we'll say is i greater than zero?
yes it is.
Is the value at intArray i minus one, which is 35,
is that greater than minus 15?
Well, yes it is.
So this condition is met, and so what we're going to do is
we're going to assign intArray two with intArray i minus one
which is intArray one,
so we're effectively going to assign 35 to position two,
and we, you saw this in the slide
so if you're having trouble
understanding what's going on here,
go ahead and look at the slides.
And then we'll decrement i to one,
and so on the second iteration,
we'll say is i greater than zero,
well, yes it is
'cause it's one, and we'll say is intArray one minus one,
which is intArray zero,
is that greater than the new element, well, yes it is,
'cause 20 is greater than minus 15
and so we're gonna shift 20 to the right.
So we're gonna say that intArray one
is equal to intArray one minus one, which is zero.
So 20 will get assigned to position one
and then we're gonna loop around and subtract one from i
and at this point, i will be zero,
so we'll say is i greater than zero?
Well, no it's not.
So we'll drop out of the loop
because we've hit the front of the array.
Now when we find the correct position,
what do we need to do?
Well, our final step when we drop out of this loop
is to assign intArray i with newElement,
so in the case we just looked at,
when we drop out of the loop, i is zero,
and so we're going to assign minus 15 to intArray zero
and that's exactly what we want.
It'll put minus 15 at the front
and we've shifted 20 and 35 over one.
And so that's how this implementation works
and we have finished coding the implementation.
And so the outer loop is the one
that's growing the sorted partition by one,
and the inner loop is that one that's looking
for the correct position to insert each element
and is doing the shifting.
So let's run this to make sure this actually works.
And indeed it does, we get minus 22, minus 15,
one, seven, 20, 35, and 55.
I'll just close that off, and so that is insertion sort.
It works by taking each element and inserting it
into its correct position in the sorted partition
and at the end, when we've gone through all the elements,
the entire array is the sorted partition.
And so we're done.
Okay, now as you can imagine,
sometimes this will involve a lot of shifting, for example,
I guess I should remove that comma there, I'll do that,
for example, in our array, the smallest value in the array
is right at the end of the array.
So when we finally hit minus 22,
we're gonna have to do a lot of shifting,
we're gonna have to shift every other element
in the array to the right, to make room for minus 22.
There can be a lot of shifting with this algorithm
and so perhaps there is way to improve this algorithm,
and there is, and we're going to look at that
in the next video, I'll see you there.